You know, I don't know if you've ever had the experience.
I'm sure you have, like I have, of things that you've just kind of always heard seemingly common knowledge.
But then when you actually stop and think about it, you realize, well, there's more to it than that.
It's not quite the way I've always thought about it.
For instance, maybe you've heard that a goldfish have a three-second memory.
Which you've really thought about that, it would mean that the plastic castle in the fishbowl would be a complete surprise to them, 20 times a minute, right?
You just go, there's more to it than that, you're pretty sure.
Or that humans only use 10% of their brain.
Because if that were true, there should be plenty of room for me to remember where I put my keys, and that doesn't happen.
I've also heard this thing about how if you drop a
a dime from the top of the Empire State Building that it could kill someone on the ground.
Then you'd think of it and go, really?
I mean, it would for sure hurt.
I don't think it would kill them.
But then along with that, they tell you that a Peregrine Falcon seated at the top of the Empire State Building can read the print on a dime laying on the ground, which causes me to ask since when can Peregrine Falcons read, right?
So the story that we're going to be looking at this morning is one where, at least for me, there's a way I've always heard it presented.
And maybe it's one you've heard before as well.
It's a story about Israel fighting against Amalek.
And this is the story where Moses holds his hands up, holding aloft the staff over his head.
If you grew up going to church and went to Sunday school, you probably have heard this story in the past.
When you've heard the story, at least when I've heard the story, the application that I've often heard made is that, well, two things.
One is supporting friends in times of need because remember Moses' arms get tired and it's two others that come alongside Aaron and her that come on each side and help hold his hands aloft.
But then I've always heard a lot of application made to this being about prayer, that praying to God and looking for his help.
Now it's interesting, I asked a group of adults recently about the story and I said, is that the way you've always heard this presented?
And they all looked at me and said, no, we really haven't.
I went, wow, I guess I'm the only one.
Except I did read a bunch of commentaries and a lot of the commentaries did the same thing.
They made kind of the main focal point of that story about Moses being prayer.
And the more I've looked at it, it seems to me that that's not really the main point.
And so I want to take us through the story this morning and think about what is this story about and then what does that have to do with us, if anything.
So this comes out of Exodus, chapter 17, verses eight through 16.
Here's what it says.
Then Amalek came and fought with Israel at Refidim.
Don't worry if you don't know who those people are, we'll get to that.
So Moses said to Josh, would choose for us men and go out and fight with Amalek.
Tomorrow I will stand on the top of the hill with the staff of God in my hand."
So Joshua did, as Moses told him, and fought with Amalek, while Moses, Aaron, and her went up to the top of the hill.
Whenever Moses held up his hand, Israel prevailed.
Whenever he lowered his hand, Amalek prevailed.
But Moses' hands grew weary, so they took a stone and put it under him, and he sat on it, while Aaron and her held up his hands, one on one side and the other on the other side,
so his hands were steady until the going down of the sun.
And Joshua overwhelmed Amalek and his people with the sword.
Then the Lord said to Moses, write this as a memorial in a book and recite it in the ears of Joshua, that I will utterly blot out the memory of Amalek from under heaven.
And Moses built an altar and called the name of it, the Lord is my banner, saying, a hand upon the throne of the Lord,
The Lord will have war with Amalek from generation to generation.
Now here's some questions, okay?
About this idea that what this story is about is about prayer.
As we've read that story, does it anywhere in the passage say that Moses was praying?
It doesn't.
It doesn't say that Aaron and her were praying either.
So if it's not about prayer, what is it about?
Well, first the setting.
The story in Exodus starts rather abruptly.
It starts this way.
It says then Amalek came and fought with Israel at Raphidim, which there's actually a bit more backstory to what's going on here.
If you want to go back in history, the Amalekites were the descendants of a guy named Esau.
Esau was the older and the more impulsive brother of a guy named Isaac.
And of course, Isaac was the forefather of the nation of Israel.
He was a, Isaac was the father, the younger brother of Esau was Jacob, okay?
So Jacob and Esau, the two brothers.
As the older brother, Esau and their culture was entitled to the birthright.
That was a legal claim to the majority of the fathers of state as well as authority over the family.
That was his by right.
Now it turns out,
that Esau, as you read his story, you realize this was a guy who didn't spend too much time thinking about his 401k.
He wasn't a real future planner if you get my meaning.
And appears to have been a guy that really lived for the moment.
The younger brother, Jacob, definitely was thinking about the future.
He was a little smarter strategically than his older brother.
And he knew how to answer the door when opportunity knocked.
And so one afternoon, as the story goes, Jacob was cooking up this nice stew when Esau, who's been out hunting, working hard, shows up, and he's famished.
And after this long day of hunting, Esau said that man, he would give anything for some of that stew.
And Jacob heard opportunity knocking.
And he said, well, how about if we swap stew for birthright?
And foolishly, Esau agrees.
It's kind of like, sure, the birthright, that's just a word.
What does that mean?
I'm starving.
You can have the birthright.
I don't care.
Now, as you read the story, these two brothers, you'll find out that there were some other shenanigans that followed after that.
Jacob kept getting the better of Esau, and that did not create much in the way of familial harmony.
So some grudges were formed, and grudges like that get passed along.
Jacob's descendants, as I said, were the children of Israel.
Esau's descendants included the Amalekites.
So the Amalekites didn't mind Israel living as slaves in Egypt.
They were fine with that.
They didn't much care for them, though, being tourists coming through their land.
And so that sets up the conflict.
There may have been some water rights involved as well.
You remember that Exodus records this fight happened at Refidim?
And you may recall that refedim is where God performed that miracle of water coming from the rock.
And so whereas refedim had normally been a watering source, it appears that it had gone dry.
And when you live in a desert region, water is a precious commodity.
So suddenly, here's all these people coming through needing water, needing resources that may have played into this conflict.
Finally, it appears that the amylakites were opportunists.
They were desert marauders.
We get more details about this fight when we get to the book of Deuteronomy.
And in fact, as we've been going through this story of Israel and the Exodus, maybe you've noticed we've jumped at times from Exodus to Deuteronomy and you're thinking, what's the deal here?
They seem like they're parallel accounts.
And what happens is Exodus records the history of Israel exiting Egypt, right?
The Exodus.
making their way toward the Promised Land.
Deuteronomy is kind of Moses' swan song.
When Moses learned that he was not going to be allowed to go into the Promised Land, Deuteronomy becomes his final message to the people that he's led for 40 years.
And as part of that message, he recounts their history.
And along with that, he gives them warnings, he gives them wisdom.
And so that's why you oftentimes find these parallel accounts.
Exodus records it.
Moses recites it again as part of his last message to the people of Israel.
So here's what we find in Deuteronomy 25 that goes back to this issue with the Amalekites at Refidim.
Remember what Amalek did to you on the way as you came out of Egypt, how he attacked you on the way when you were faint and weary and cut off your tail, those who were lagging behind you and he did not fear God.
So what you find out from this is that this did not start as a fair fight.
This was not like two armies that arrayed themselves for battle.
He says, no, Amulet came out, and they were taking out the stragglers.
They were coming up from behind, and so who would be behind?
Well, it would be probably women, children, the aged, the ones that couldn't keep up, because understand, this is a lot of people that are moving.
And so this column probably stretched out over a span of possibly miles from the head of the column to the tail.
And he says, these amylakites, they saw opportunity.
They're coming up and they're marauding from the back, taking out the weak.
And so you can imagine the time it took for the message to get from the back of the line up to the head of the column to say, Moses, we've got problems back here.
There are marauders back here attacking the weak.
And so that is what sets us up.
for this battle.
It also gives some better perspective as to why the judgment against Amalek was so harsh.
They had been these people that were marauding and assaulting the weak among Israel.
So as soon as Moses learns about what's going on at the rear of the caravan, he calls for his fighters.
And the man that he turns to first is this guy named Joshua.
Of course, you probably are from the Joshua.
Joshua, ultimately, will be the leader that replaces Moses.
But that is years down the road.
That's going to happen.
This is actually the first time that we hear Joshua's name is showing up in this battle with Amalek.
And his appearance here tells us that Joshua was already a known and trusted leader.
We'll talk more about Joshua in a few weeks.
But he was recognized by Moses right away as the right man
to lead the fight.
We're told that Joshua is told to go out and to draft an army.
Moses says, go out and choose men for us.
At this point, we talked about this few weeks ago, God had intentionally led Israel around points of conflict.
They could have found themselves in battle sooner with other people, and God intentionally led them around it because they weren't ready to fight.
But this time, there's no getting around the fight.
The fight has come to them.
Amalek has come after them.
And it would appear that there wasn't yet any kind of a formal militia established, right?
That has not been on the to-do list so far.
Moses says to Joshua, we've got to pull some men together so that we can defend ourselves.
And so that's Joshua's job, to find that fighting force and then go fight the Amalekites.
As for Moses, he lets Joshua know that what he's going to do
He's going to place himself in this prominent position up at the top of a hill, and he's going to be holding up, he says, the staff of God.
When we started this study, we began with the story of Passover.
That was the point which officially launched the Exodus from Egypt.
But the things Moses had done prior to that were an important prequel.
Moses' staff was central to those events.
The first time that we encounter the staff goes all the way back to that burning bush.
Remember the story of the burning bush?
Moses is out there being a shepherd just minding his own business and suddenly he's confronted by this bush that's in flames but the bush isn't burning.
And he approaches it and it is God's presence.
And God speaks to him.
He says, take off your sandals, you're standing on holy ground.
And that's when God tells him that he's going to be sent back to his people to deliver them from Egypt, which sounds like a pretty tall task.
And Moses didn't think that anybody was going to believe that this really was the mission God had sent him on.
It's like, why are they going to believe if I show up and say, God sent me to deliver you, you know?
Hi.
And so here's what God says, or what Moses says first.
Moses answered, behold, they will not believe me or listen to my voice.
They'll say, the Lord did not appear to you.
The Lord said to him, what is that in your hand?
And he said, a staff?
And he said, throw it on the ground.
So he threw it on the ground and became a serpent.
And Moses ran from it.
And here we learned that Moses was afraid of snakes, OK?
But the Lord said to Moses, put out your hand and catch it by the tail.
So he put out his hand, caught it, and became a staff in his hand.
that they may believe that the Lord, the God of their fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac and the God of Jacob has appeared to you.
So right away God says this staff is going to play an important role in validating that in fact I am the one who has sent you to deliver the people.
Well then as Moses goes back as he begins to confront Pharaoh with this message to let the people go and Pharaoh keeps saying I'm not going to let the people go, we have that series of plagues.
And in several of these plagues, again, we find that the staff plays an important role.
For instance, when the Nile is turned to blood, Moses is holding the staff in his hand.
Or when we have the story of the plague of hail, Moses stretched out his staff toward heaven.
The Lord sent thunder and hail.
Or the plague of the locus, once again.
Moses stretched out his staff over the land of Egypt.
The Lord brought an east wind on the land, all that day, all that night.
The East wind brought the locus.
Or when you get, they finally get released from Egypt and we come to them at the Red Sea.
They're trapped between Pharaoh's army and the Red Sea.
They see no way of escape.
And once again, we're told that the Lord is going to deliver them.
He says, tell the people of Israel, go forward, lift up your staff, stretch out your hand over the sea and divide it that the people of Israel may go through the sea on dry ground.
And of course, last week, we looked at the story of water from a rock and how the Lord said to Moses, I want you to take your staff and to strike the rock.
And we talked in detail about what that story was all about.
Well, now, once again, we have this battle with Amalek.
And Moses says, I'm going to go up on the hilltop.
I'm going to have the staff of God in my hand.
I'm going to hold that aloft.
So the question is, what was the staff of God?
Why is that so important?
Well, I'd say first it was the symbolic representation of God's power to judge and protect his people.
Now, when God first came to Moses, Moses out there being a shepherd to sheep.
A staff was the shepherd's tool.
It was how he guided his sheep.
It was how he protected his sheep.
And so it's that tool that God says, this becomes a symbol of my power and my presence with you.
It also validated Moses as God's chosen instrument.
He says, if they say, did God really send you?
He says, this becomes the evidence that God has sent me to bring deliverance.
I think that making it something separate from Moses himself, though made it clear that the power Moses was wielding was not his own.
I mean, God could have given Moses magic fingers, right?
But he doesn't do that.
It's like this is not just about Moses having power.
This is about Moses being chosen to wield God's power.
And so the symbol of God's power becomes something separate from Moses himself.
So was Moses holding the staff and act of prayer?
Well, I don't think so.
This staff had been this sign of assurance to Moses that God was with him.
It was a sign of God's presence and his power, both to Pharaoh and to Israel.
Moses never bowed to the staff, like he might have bowed before an altar.
He didn't pray to the staff.
The times that he went to meet with God, he either went into the 10th meeting or went up on Mount Sinai.
He didn't go to meet with the staff.
The staff always served as a symbol of God's power,
being present with and providing for his people with Moses being his chosen agent through whom that power was being mediated.
Now in terms of the battle itself, there's not much detail given other than it went well and it went badly by spells.
The whole focus of the drama is placed on Moses holding the staff aloft.
When the staff is held high, we're told that Joshua and his fighters get the upper hand.
When the staff drops down, Joshua's troops find themselves on the defensive.
That is really the crux of the story.
The battle was not a short one.
We find that Moses gets tired in the course of what he's doing.
Now, Moses had been a shepherd for 40 years.
He'd been leading the people on this long trek in the wilderness.
So I'm guessing this guy had pretty good standing power.
And yet, things drug onto the point that Moses needed to sit down.
So we have this account of Erin and her.
They get him a nice, comfortable rock.
They brought the rock to him so he could stay in that highly visible position.
And we're told that not only his legs got tired, but his arms started giving out as well.
Judging from the text appears, he might have tried both hands, right?
First it says he held up his hand whenever he lowered his hand.
And then we find his hands, plural, grew weary.
So it's almost like, man, he did this arm for a while and he did this arm for a while and tried both arms for a while.
And finally, he's just out of energy.
And so you find Aaron and her helping him out, which Aaron and her positioned themselves to support him.
And it wasn't just the staff that mattered in this equation.
If it was, Moses could just handed it off to one of those two guys.
He'd say, here, hang on to this.
Just keep it high.
That's all that matters.
And yet Moses
was the one through whom God was leading the people.
It again, established Moses as the leader, even though he wasn't personally down there in the fight.
And so they had to stay there until night fell.
And so it's a long battle last all day.
And finally, Joshua gains the upper hand.
And maybe due to cover of darkness, the Amalekites were finally able to break contact and sneak away.
In the aftermath, two things happened.
The first is that the Lord told Moses to write a memorial and recited in the ears of Joshua, which is interesting because you would think that Joshua, who had been in the battle, wouldn't need anyone to remind him about what had happened.
He had lived it.
And yet what God wanted Joshua to know was that he wasn't done with Amalek yet.
Amalek was still lurking out there.
And the day would come when Joshua and the leaders who came after him would have to deal with Amalek once and for all.
The message is, Joshua, you're not to make peace with Amalek.
We're not gonna follow that history out, but if you were to follow the history, you'd find in fact that was true.
Amalek comes back in Israel's history and has to be dealt with again.
The second thing we find is that Moses built an altar to the Lord.
And he gave the altar an interesting name.
He named the altar, the Lord is my banner.
And then he said, this battle with Amalek would stretch across generations.
And so Moses is saying that the battle would always be the Lord's as long as God's people stayed true to God as their leader.
Now I started with that thesis that the story of Moses holding the staff aloft is not primarily a call to prayer.
Even though I've often heard it treated as such.
And don't get me wrong, I'm all for prayer, okay?
So if you go home and say, wow, Pastor Tim said we shouldn't pray, you didn't hear the sermon, okay?
In fact, we're gonna, because I believe there is an element of prayer in this, all right?
I just don't think that's the central message.
A couple things I don't like about just turning this into a metaphor for prayer.
First is, like I said, I don't think that Moses was praying.
I mean, I do think he was praying,
but holding the staff aloft itself was not an act of prayer.
It was a declaration.
It was a declaration of God's power and presence and authority with his people.
The second thing I don't like about turning it just into a metaphor for prayer is I think it can distort our understanding of the practice of prayer.
We can begin to think that God's answers to prayer are contingent on
our intensity or even our physical sacrifice.
If the reason that Israel prevailed was because of Moses' intensity, because of Moses' hard work, because Moses held the staff aloft, and we say, well, that's what prayer is like.
Unless we stay intense enough, unless we sacrifice enough, God won't be able to act.
You can go to some really unhealthy places in your understanding about prayer in that sense.
suddenly the ritual of how we pray can begin to seem as important as the prayer itself.
I don't think that Moses went up on the hill and raised the staff so that God could see him better.
He wasn't trying to get God's attention, right?
That would be prayer.
He was trying to get the attention of his warriors in the battle.
Every time they glanced up from the battle, there was Moses holding the staff aloft at the top of the hill.
The staff that had brought down plagues on Egypt, the staff that had secured their release, the staff that had split the Red Sea and allowed them to escape, the staff that had just struck the rock and brought forth life-saving water.
The staff that declared that God was their shepherd, he was their defender, or as Moses named the altar, the Lord was their banner.
He was the one who was under his authority that they were fighting.
In all of those prior instances, all the other times they had seen the staff raised, they really had been just passive observers, right?
They simply had watched Moses wield the staff.
They hadn't done anything to do except take advantage of the opportunities.
They walked to freedom.
They got a drink of water.
But this time is different.
This time, they're in a fight.
They don't just get to stand back and watch.
They actually have to enter in.
And the temptation could have been in that fight to think that the winning was all up to them.
Every time they looked up at the hill, they saw Moses holding the staff aloft, declaring that we are God's people.
And when the staff came down, when they began to think that the battle is just about us, they begin losing ground.
So the message was you need to fight, but you don't fight alone.
This success still demands on God's power.
And in case they weren't sure how much they needed God's power, every time the staff dropped, they started losing ground.
Which also told them there was more to the fight than just swords and spears.
There was something else going on.
Something they couldn't just quantify in the physical realm.
It's like, why are we being less effective now than we were then?
Well, it's because there's more going on.
God is with you behind the scenes, sovereign over the situation, so that you can win this fight.
So what can we take away from this passage?
And I, quite honestly, I've wrestled a lot with this passage.
And I'm not sure I've brought it to the ground yet.
Some of you may have greater insight than me.
That's just fine.
Again, I'm not saying this that we don't need to pray.
In fact, I'm gonna talk about an aspect of prayer that I think is really important that plays into this.
But I think this story has a lot to remind us of how we face conflict.
There are times when God in his kindness saves us from the fight.
I think sometimes we don't even know we've been saved from the fight, but God has saved us from the fight.
Situations we thought
We're gonna bring conflicts, suddenly resolve themselves peaceably.
Things that we have worried about and kept awake at night with nervous anticipation.
I don't know if you've ever done that.
I've done it once or twice.
They end up being nothing.
It's like the fight doesn't happen.
And we say, God, thank you for saving me from the fight.
But there are also times when the Amalekite show up.
People or situations that cannot be avoided
and that seem intent to do us harm, and we can't avoid the fight.
It comes to us.
There appear to be these times that God wants us to face the conflict.
I mean, why couldn't God have simply done a miracle to defeat the Amalekites without Joshua ever stepping into the battle?
He could have, but he didn't.
In this situation, Israel was expected to step into the fight.
They had to face
conflict and there are times in all of our lives that like it or not we have conflict that we have to face.
The question is how do we face it?
What does it look like to face conflict as God's people?
One of the things I pick up from this story is that when conflict comes
You should marshal your best defenses.
Moses didn't just send people out willy-nilly.
He didn't send the women and the children and the infirm and the elderly out to fight.
He picked a strong leader.
He got Joshua and he said, go find strong warriors.
So you want to use some intelligence about how you come at the conflict.
You look for wise counselors.
people who can help you to prepare well and support you in the conflict.
I think as a follower of Jesus, that means we look for counsel and support from counselors who themselves are experienced followers of Jesus.
The world has a lot of suggestions about how to face a fight.
They're not all true wisdom.
Find people who really are committed to Jesus to help you decide what is a Jesus kind of strategy to deal with conflict.
Second thing I would say is we need to hold the staff high and keep it in our sights.
And here's what I mean by that.
The staff was this visible reminder to Joshua that they were not alone in the battle.
It was a reminder that they were part of a tribe that was loved and chosen and protected by the Lord.
The Lord was their shepherd.
And he's ours as well, right?
Jesus uses that image to talk about us as His flock and He is our shepherd.
And this is where I think prayer does come in.
Not so much that we have to work hard enough, do enough to get God to listen to us.
God is listening.
We should pray He wants to hear.
But the thing that I think helps us to keep our gaze from becoming trapped in the immediacy of the conflict is praise.
I love the selection of songs that Vernon and the team have this morning.
Songs of praise that keep reminding us that we are not in the fight alone.
God is with us.
God is our shepherd.
And so that part of prayer, I say amen, that that for sure is a way that we lift our eyes like the soldiers fighting with the Amalekites kept looking up to the hill and going, yep, we are God's people.
God is with us.
praise is one of the ways that we refocus our hearts, remind ourselves that we are not in this alone.
The problem is when we get into conflict that drags on and on, it's the long conflicts.
I'm pretty good at looking at handling it great with short conflicts.
Give me a test for a day and man, I can pray my way through that and praise the Lord and move on.
But let it drag on for a couple weeks or a couple months or a couple years.
And it's real easy to let my gay shift from here down to here and get that sort of tunnel vision.
And when I get that way, I start using the wrong strategies.
I start trying to win the wrong way.
If you move side of who you are and under whose banner you live, I think your strategies become those of a panicked person, which means it's no holds barred, whatever it takes to win.
Bitterness can replace wisdom.
Bitterness takes the place of forgiveness.
It's imperative when we're in conflict to remember under whose banner we fight.
We fight under the banner of the Lamb who died and rose again.
My wife has found a little phrase that she's been quoting the last few weeks.
Says, trust the man who died for you.
It's under his banner that we fight.
And that means that our strategies always have to conform to his, which means that winning in the conflict may look very different at times from how the world views winning.
Jesus talked about those who followed him to his win, being people who would take up a cross, people who would be willing to sacrifice, and also means that winning in the way of the world
may actually be losing in the battle that matters most.
The Apostle Paul, of course, made that point.
You probably know the verse, Ephesians 6.
He says, we do not wrestle against flesh and blood, but against spiritual forces of evil in the heavenly places.
In other words, Paul said there's more going on here.
Just like Joshua facing the Amalekites, it's like there's more going on here than just soldier to soldier having a conflict.
Because when your eyes understand on whose banner you fight, the battle goes well.
You take your eyes off of that, the battle does not go well.
And Paul says, don't forget, the conflicts you're in are not just about that person.
There is a spiritual reality here as well.
Our thought of second Corinthians, I don't have it on the screen.
It says our present troubles are small and won't last very long, and yet they produce for us a glory that vastly outweighs them and will last forever.
So we don't look at the troubles we can see now.
Rather, we fix our gaze on things that cannot be seen.
For the things we see now will soon be gone, but the things we cannot see will last forever.
Again, it's this focus.
Where do my eyes turn?
in the midst of conflict, in the midst of struggle.
I don't know what the conflicts are you're facing right now.
There's probably no one in this room that isn't facing some kind of conflict, some kind of battle.
Maybe it is a battle within your own family.
As a pastor over the years, I have seen lots of people get entangled in some pretty ugly and protracted family disputes.
Many of you have gone through the pain of divorce and you understand the conflict and the pain that comes with that.
Or maybe it's been a conflict over aging parents or the settling of an estate.
Or maybe it's been a family members addiction or some dysfunction that has thrown relationships into chaos and caused all kinds of conflict.
And again, when those things drag on for a week after week and month after month and year after year,
It's easy to forget under whose banner we are to face conflict.
And sometimes we need Jesus' loving friends who can come alongside us and help us to once again lift the cross high above the battle.
To help lift our focus up again and say, under whose banner do we fight?
Maybe it's a literal physical battle.
Maybe you're dealing with chronic illness, some kind of
pain and for me to just won't stop.
I saw a quip recently, it said that middle aged that time of life when you still believe it'll be better in the morning.
You know, I'd have to say that some of the most humble, kind, faithful people that I've known over the years have been people who have lived with long-term illness, and yet they've kept their gaze on Jesus.
A lot of us know the story of Johnny Eric's and Tata.
To me, she's a class example of someone who has faced great physical challenges, a quadriplegic since she was a young woman, lived her life out with all of the complications that presents, and yet to know Johnny's story is to see someone who is filled with joy.
Not because life isn't difficult, not because the pain hasn't gone on for years and years and years,
but because she's someone who has a heart who has kept her eyes on the banner.
She still lifts her voice in praise, and she's had an incredible impact on so many because of that.
But I've also known people who turned inward and became despondent and bitter and full of self-pity in the midst of those battles.
Psalm 23, again, I don't have this on the screen,
Part of what it says is, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil.
Your rod and your staff, they come from me.
There comes the staff again.
I've made the point in another context that in that Psalm, he says, though I walk through the valley.
In other words, there are some valleys you have to go through.
I'd rather go around the valley of the shadow of death or fly over it or just not even go there.
But he says, no, there are times you have to go through the valley
And you walk.
I wouldn't mind running, skipping, jumping something, but no, you walk.
There is a slow process sometimes of going through that dark valley.
And yet the promise in it is the shepherd is still there.
His staff is still with you.
And so don't lose heart.
Maybe it's a conflict in your workplace.
Boy, that can consume an awful lot of emotional energy, can it?
And break into open warfare?
I've told the story before about a friend of mine years ago in California had a boss that these two just, oh my goodness, it got ugly.
And this guy would come and talk to you about it.
And we had talked about forgiveness.
And he just could not see any way that he could forgive this jerk for the way he treated him.
And it got so bad.
He got so angry as a boss, he finally came and confessed to me that he was having dreams about murdering his boss.
And I'm like, you know, you really got to handle that, you know?
So we talked about forgiveness, and he finally, he wrestled through, he prayed through, and he said, yeah, this is the banner that I face conflict on her.
My banner is the Lord.
And so the time came, he sat down with his boss.
They talked about the conflict.
And my friend with fear and trembling said, I just want you to know that I, I've forgiven you for that stuff.
Now, this had been a hard boss.
He says this, not knowing what's gonna happen,
The boss gets up from his chair, tears running down his face, comes around and gives this guy a hug, which he didn't know what to do.
This was not the response he was looking for.
But again, sometimes the change it makes when we decide to fight the way the Lord wants us to fight, not the way we want to fight in ourselves.
Maybe the fight that's consuming you, consuming your emotions is this thing we call the culture wars.
And for sure, there's lots of things in our culture that run counter to righteousness.
But that's really nothing new.
You can plunge your finger down in the history book on any page at any time and you will find all kinds of wickedness going on.
It's a fallen world.
But one of the things that has concerned me increasingly in our current time is how sometimes people who profess to march under the banner of Jesus wanting to fight for the right
have chosen some of the strategy of the world to do it.
For Christians, the sign of God's power and presence isn't the rod of Moses, it is the cross of Jesus.
And so if you're being tempted to dip into anger or try to grab power or look for revenge or view your enemies with disdain, could I just say that's not how you fight under the banner of the cross?
The Apostle Paul reminded Christians living in
arguably even darker times that lowering their gains to a human level.
Their political opponents, their religious detractors, he said, is to be consumed with the wrong battle.
We don't wrestle against flesh and blood.
The Amalekites the Christian fights are spiritual forces.
The battle first and foremost is a spiritual battle.
And it must be fought with the weapons of the cross to fight with anything else is ultimately to lose.
to take our eyes off the man on the hill who died for us.
For the follower of Jesus, our standard bearer is not an old man seated on a hill holding aloft his staff.
It is a bleeding man high on a hill crucified on a cross, praying forgiveness over his enemies and radically sacrificing himself in love for the very people who put in there.
So I just say if you are tiring in a battle, whatever that battle is, find someone who will help lift Jesus high before your eyes.
Remind yourself under whose banner you fight.
And if you have a friend who's in a battle, whatever that battle is, physical, emotional, spiritual, it's good to empathize, but don't forget
to help them keep their eyes on the cross.
Therein lies the victory that has always taken the world by surprise.
May all of our battles be fought under his banner and using his strategy.
Amen?
Let's pray.
Father, you know all of the battles that the people in this room represent.
or things that we would rather avoid, and yet there it is.
There are the Amalekites and we have to face it.
I pray for my brothers and sisters this morning who are tired in whatever that conflict is.
Lord, I pray that you would help their eyes to be lifted up to you, that you would in a fresh way remind them, that you have not forsaken them.
You are the good shepherd who goes with us through the valley of the shadow of death.
Your rod, your staff, your concern, your care is still with us, is still sovereign.
Or if in getting our eyes turned off of you, we have allowed our hearts to become consumed in strategies that aren't your strategies.
What I prayed you would free us from those things.
Grannish your grace, may your spirit fill us and move us that we would face conflict in a way that honors Jesus.
And if we didn't even know what that means, Lord, maybe we don't even know what it looks like in the fight we're facing, I pray you'd give us wisdom.
I prayed you'd give us insight.
You said that you would give us wisdom if we didn't know what to do.
And so we would ask you for that wisdom, pray that you would give us
Friends, counselors who are wise counselors who love you that would help us figure out what it looks like to meet our conflict in a way that honors you.
Thank you, Lord, that we do not walk alone, that it is your banner that we live under.
We pray this all in the name of Jesus who gave himself for us.
Amen.